Add i18n Recipe (#2895)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/recipes/i18n.mdx

---

> title: Add internationalization features 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Add internationalization (i18n) features 
```
Was just looking at this on the site and my eye always looks for "i18n" specifically

Reviewer 2: Good thinking. Also just confirmed this is much more frequently what people search for. I’m going to switch this up so we do include “internationalization” in the description.

description: Use dynamic routing and content collections to add i18n support to your Astro site.
type: recipe
i18nReady: false
---
import FileTree from '~/components/FileTree.astro'
import StaticSsrTabs from '~/components/tabs/StaticSsrTabs.astro'

Astro doesn't have built-in internationalization (i18n) support, but you can build your own i18n solution. In this recipe, you'll learn how to use content collections and dynamic routing to serve content for different languages.

> 

Reviewer: I'd start off with was sort of URL scheme you're going for (what's the output of following this guide). For example `astro.build/[lang]/blog/foo-bar`

    - src/
      - pages/
        - **en/**
          - about.astro
          - index.astro
        - **fr/**
          - about.astro
          - index.astro
        - index.astro
    </FileTree>

    
2. Set up `src/pages/index.astro` to redirect to your default language.

    <StaticSsrTabs>
      <Fragment slot="static">
        ```astro
        ---
        // src/pages/index.astro
        ---
        <meta http-equiv="refresh" content="0;url=/en/" />
        ```

        This approach uses a [meta refresh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meta_refresh) and will work however you deploy your site. Some static hosts also let you configure server redirects with a custom configuration file. See your deploy platform’s documentation for more details.
      </Fragment>
      
      <Fragment slot ="ssr">
        If you are using an SSR adapter, you can use [`Astro.redirect`](/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#astroredirect) to redirect to the default language on the server.

        ```astro
        ---
        // src/pages/index.astro
        return Astro.redirect('/en/');
        ---
        ```
      </Fragment>
    </StaticSsrTabs>

### Use collections for translated content

> 1. Create a folder in `src/content/` for each type of content you want to include, and create subdirectories for each supported language. For example, to support English and French blog posts:

Reviewer 3: The comma here is unnecessary, though removing it will expose the double "create". Considering this, I believe that just changing the second one to "add" solves the problem.
```suggestion
1. Create a folder in `src/content/` for each type of content you want to include and add subdirectories for each supported language. For example, to support English and French blog posts:
```

    <FileTree>
    - src/
      - content/
          - blog/
            - **en/** Blog posts in English
                - post-1.md
                - post-2.md
            - **fr/** Blog posts in French
              - post-1.md
              - post-2.md
    </FileTree>

2. Create a `src/content/config.ts` file and export a collection for each type of content.

    ```ts
    //src/content/config.ts
    import { defineCollection, z } from 'astro:content';

    const blogCollection = defineCollection({
      schema: z.object({
        title: z.string(),
        author: z.string(),
        date: z.date()
      })
    });

    export const collections = {
      'blog': blogCollection
    };

    ```

>     📚 [Read more about Content Collections.](/en/guides/content-collections/)

Reviewer 2: Actually looking closely we also leave out the generic link text too, which is probably better.

```suggestion
    📚 Read more about [Content Collections.](/en/guides/content-collections/)
```

3. Use [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) to fetch and render content based on a `lang` and a `slug` parameter.

    <StaticSsrTabs>
      <Fragment slot="static">
        In static rendering mode, use `getStaticPaths` to map each content entry to a page:

        ```astro
        //src/pages/[lang]/blog/[...slug].astro
        ---
        import { getCollection } from 'astro:content'

        export async function getStaticPaths() {
          const pages = await getCollection('blog')

          const paths = pages.map(page => {
            const [lang, ...slug] = page.slug.split('/');
            return { params: { lang, slug: slug.join('/') || undefined }, props: page }
          })

          return paths;
        }

        const { lang, slug } = Astro.params;
        const page = Astro.props;

>         const formattedDate = page.data.date.toLocaleString(lang);

Reviewer: `toLocaleString()` could potentially be confusing for those not familiar with it. Maybe a callout of what that is and link to some nice MDN docs?

        const { Content } = await page.render();
        ---
        <h1>{page.data.title}</h1>
        <p>by {page.data.author} at {formattedDate}</p>
        <Content/>
        ```
      </Fragment>

      <Fragment slot="ssr">
        In [SSR mode](/en/guides/server-side-rendering/), fetch the requested entry directly:

        ```astro
        //src/pages/[lang]/blog/[...slug].astro
        ---
        import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';

        const { lang, slug } = Astro.params;
        const page = await getEntryBySlug('blog', `${lang}/${slug}`);

        if (!page) {
          return Astro.redirect('/404');
        }

        const formattedDate = page.data.date.toLocaleString(lang);
        const { Content, headings } = await page.render();
        ---
        <h1>{page.data.title}</h1>
        <p>by {page.data.author} at {formattedDate}</p>
        <Content/>
        ```
      </Fragment>
    </StaticSsrTabs>

>     📚 [Read more about dynamic routing](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes)

Reviewer 3: Missing comma
```suggestion
    📚 [Read more about dynamic routing](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes).
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    📚 Read more about [dynamic routing](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes).
```

### Translate UI strings

Create dictionaries of terms to translate the labels for UI elements around your site. This allows your visitors to experience your site fully in their language.

> 1. Create a `src/i18n/ui.ts` file to store your translation strings in:

Reviewer: I wonder if `ui.ts` is the best filename? Maybe `strings.ts` or something similar? 🤔

    ```ts
    // src/i18n/ui.ts
    export const languages = {
      en: 'English',

>       fr: 'français',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      fr: 'Français',
```
Same caps as English

    };

    export const defaultLang = 'en';
    

>     export const ui = {

Reviewer: If changing this then you could shorten this exported const to `s` (for string) or `t` (for translation) to make it that much easier. I think `t` is what other i18n libraries tend to use.

Reviewer 2: The `useTranslations` helper returns a `t` function, but you’re not intended to use this variable directly, so I think this OK? I could get behind a _more_ verbose name though, like `uiStrings`.

Reviewer: Keep in mind you'll be using that function A LOT so short is sweet (even with nice autocomplete)

Reviewer: Ah nevermind, I mis-read that and didn't realise at first you don't use it directly. So yes, if that's the case a more verbose name makes sense.

      en: {
        'nav.home': 'Home',
        'nav.about': 'About',
        'nav.twitter': 'Twitter',
      },
      fr: {
        'nav.home': 'Acceuil',
        'nav.about': 'À propos',
      },
    } as const;
    ```
    
2. Create a helper function to detect the page language based on the current URL and a helper to let us get translations strings for different parts of our UI in `src/i18n/utils.ts`:

    ```js
    // src/i18n/utils.ts
    import { ui, defaultLang } from './ui';
    
    export function getLangFromUrl(url: URL) {

>       const [, lang] = Astro.url.pathname.split('/');

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      const [, lang] = url.pathname.split('/');
```
I think this is suppose use the `url` argument instead of the Astro global

Reviewer 2: Oh yeah, good catch!

      return lang || defaultLang;
    }
    
    export function useTranslations(lang: keyof typeof ui) {
      return function t(key: keyof typeof ui[defaultLang]) {
        return ui[lang][key] || ui[defaultLang][key];
      }
    }
    ```

    :::note[Did you notice?]
    In step 1, the `nav.twitter` string was not translated to French. The `useTranslations` helper here will return the default language’s value if a key is not translated so that French users will still see “Twitter”.
    :::
    
3. Use our helpers to choose the UI string that corresponds to the current language. For example, a nav component might look like:

    ```astro 
    ---
    // src/components/Nav.astro
    import { getLangFromUrl, useTranslations } from '../i18n/utils';
    
    const lang = getLangFromUrl(Astro.url);
    const t = useTranslations(lang);
    ---
    <ul>
        <li>

>             <a href={`/${lang}/home/`}>

Reviewer: astro-i18n uses a function to generate routes which I like, similar DX as strings so it makes more sense in my mind than getting into string interpolation https://github.com/alexandre-fernandez/astro-i18n#translated-routing-function

Reviewer 2: Nice! Yeah, we decided to keep this recipe real simple and avoid a specific library but we’ve linked astro-i18n at the end of the page for people to explore.

            </a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="https://twitter.com/astrodotbuild">
              {t('nav.twitter')}
            </a>
        </li>
    </ul>
    ```

4. Each page should have a `lang` attribute on the `<html>` element that matches the language on the page. In this example, a [reusable layout](/en/core-concepts/layouts/) grabs the language from the route:

    ```astro
    ---
    // src/layouts/Base.astro
    
    import { getLangFromUrl } from '../i18n/utils';
    
    const lang = getLangFromUrl(Astro.url);
    ---
    <html lang={lang}>
        <head>
            <meta charset="utf-8" />
            <link rel="icon" type="image/svg+xml" href="/favicon.svg" />
            <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
            <title>Astro</title>
        </head>
        <body>
            <slot />
        </body>
    </html>
    ```

    Using this base layout will make sure our pages use the correct `lang` attribute automatically.
    
    ```astro
    ---
    // src/pages/en/about.astro
    import Base from "../../layouts/Base.astro"
    ---
    <Base>
        <h1>About me</h1>
        ...
    </Base>
    ```

> ### Let users switch between languages

Reviewer: If your use case assumes you have the same pages across each language then it can be a bit of confusing UX to switch languages but then be taken to the index page. I like it where it just swaps out the locale slug but keeps you on the respective page.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I agree, but felt maybe that that assumption was one too many for the recipe? We enforce this on the docs site — all pages must use the English slugs — but you might also want to use translated slugs and then implementing that is a little more complex. Curious to hear whether other think this is essential to include in this recipe.

    This ensures the date and time are formatted to match the user’s language.
    :::

### Translate UI strings

Create dictionaries of terms to translate the labels for UI elements around your site. This allows your visitors to experience your site fully in their language.

1. Create a `src/i18n/ui.ts` file to store your translation strings in:

    ```ts
    // src/i18n/ui.ts
    export const languages = {
      en: 'English',
      fr: 'Français',
    };

    export const defaultLang = 'en';
    
    export const ui = {
      en: {
        'nav.home': 'Home',
        'nav.about': 'About',
        'nav.twitter': 'Twitter',
      },
      fr: {
        'nav.home': 'Acceuil',
        'nav.about': 'À propos',
      },
    } as const;
    ```
    
2. Create a helper function to detect the page language based on the current URL and a helper to let us get translations strings for different parts of our UI in `src/i18n/utils.ts`:

    ```js
    // src/i18n/utils.ts
    import { ui, defaultLang } from './ui';
    
    export function getLangFromUrl(url: URL) {
      const [, lang] = url.pathname.split('/');

>       return lang || defaultLang;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      return (lang as keyof typeof ui) || defaultLang;
```
Fix type mismatch in `Nav.astro` example where `getLangFromUrl()` returns type `string` but `useTranslations()` expects type `keyof typeof ui`

Reviewer 2: Hmmm. In this case I think we might want to fix it in the `useTranslations()` function. It would be lying to say `getLangFromUrl` always returns a key of the UI dictionary. 🤔

Reviewer 2: Actually, perhaps the best here _is_ to guarantee this is always a valid language in this function, but that requires an extra if statement. I’ll update the full function.

    }
    
    export function useTranslations(lang: keyof typeof ui) {

>       return function t(key: keyof typeof ui[defaultLang]) {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      return function t(key: keyof typeof ui[typeof defaultLang]) {
```
Fix unresolved type error

Reviewer 2: Oh, yeah. Ugly 😅 

But correct — thank you!

        const page = Astro.props;
        const formattedDate = page.data.date.toLocaleString(lang);

        const { Content } = await page.render();
        ---
        <h1>{page.data.title}</h1>
        <p>by {page.data.author} • {formattedDate}</p>
        <Content/>
        ```
      </Fragment>

      <Fragment slot="ssr">
        In [SSR mode](/en/guides/server-side-rendering/), fetch the requested entry directly:

        ```astro
        //src/pages/[lang]/blog/[...slug].astro
        ---
        import { getEntryBySlug } from 'astro:content';

        const { lang, slug } = Astro.params;
        const page = await getEntryBySlug('blog', `${lang}/${slug}`);

        if (!page) {
          return Astro.redirect('/404');
        }

        const formattedDate = page.data.date.toLocaleString(lang);
        const { Content, headings } = await page.render();
        ---
        <h1>{page.data.title}</h1>
        <p>by {page.data.author} • {formattedDate}</p>
        <Content/>
        ```
      </Fragment>
    </StaticSsrTabs>

    📚 Read more about [dynamic routing](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes).

    :::tip[Date formatting]

>     The example above uses the built-in [`toLocaleString()` date-formatting method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/toLocaleString) to create a human-readable string from our frontmatter date.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    The example above uses the built-in [`toLocaleString()` date-formatting method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date/toLocaleString) to create a human-readable string from the frontmatter date.
```
frontmatter's ?

from the date in the frontmatter?

Whatever lets us avoid "our".

    This ensures the date and time are formatted to match the user’s language.
    :::

### Translate UI strings

Create dictionaries of terms to translate the labels for UI elements around your site. This allows your visitors to experience your site fully in their language.

> 1. Create a `src/i18n/ui.ts` file to store your translation strings in:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. Create a `src/i18n/ui.ts` file to store your translation strings:
```
I think we can get away without the ending preposition? I think this still works? Non-blocking.

    ```ts
    // src/i18n/ui.ts
    export const languages = {
      en: 'English',
      fr: 'Français',
    };

    export const defaultLang = 'en';
    
    export const ui = {
      en: {
        'nav.home': 'Home',
        'nav.about': 'About',
        'nav.twitter': 'Twitter',
      },
      fr: {
        'nav.home': 'Acceuil',
        'nav.about': 'À propos',
      },
    } as const;
    ```
    

> 2. Create a helper function to detect the page language based on the current URL and a helper to let us get translations strings for different parts of our UI in `src/i18n/utils.ts`:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Create two helper functions: one to detect the page language based on the current URL, and one helper to get translations strings for different parts of the UI in `src/i18n/utils.ts`:
```

    ```js
    // src/i18n/utils.ts
    import { ui, defaultLang } from './ui';
    
    export function getLangFromUrl(url: URL) {
      const [, lang] = url.pathname.split('/');
      if (lang in ui) return lang as keyof typeof ui;
      return defaultLang;
    }
    
    export function useTranslations(lang: keyof typeof ui) {
      return function t(key: keyof typeof ui[typeof defaultLang]) {
        return ui[lang][key] || ui[defaultLang][key];
      }
    }
    ```

    :::note[Did you notice?]

>     In step 1, the `nav.twitter` string was not translated to French. The `useTranslations` helper here will return the default language’s value if a key is not translated so that French users will still see “Twitter”.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    In step 1, the `nav.twitter` string was not translated to French. You may not want every term translated, such as proper names or common industry terms. The `useTranslations` helper will return the default language’s value if a key is not translated. In this example, French users will also see “Twitter” in the nav bar.
```
Something like this? I think the explicit call out, "Hey! You don't have to translate everything!" is potentially helpful here.

    :::
    

> 3. Use our helpers to choose the UI string that corresponds to the current language. For example, a nav component might look like:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3. Import the helpers where needed and use them to choose the UI string that corresponds to the current language. For example, a nav component might look like:
```

    ```astro 
    ---
    // src/components/Nav.astro
    import { getLangFromUrl, useTranslations } from '../i18n/utils';
    
    const lang = getLangFromUrl(Astro.url);
    const t = useTranslations(lang);
    ---
    <ul>
        <li>
            <a href={`/${lang}/home/`}>
              {t('nav.home')}
            </a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href={`/${lang}/about/`}>
              {t('nav.about')}
            </a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="https://twitter.com/astrodotbuild">
              {t('nav.twitter')}
            </a>
        </li>
    </ul>
    ```

> 4. Each page should have a `lang` attribute on the `<html>` element that matches the language on the page. In this example, a [reusable layout](/en/core-concepts/layouts/) grabs the language from the route:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
4. Each page must have a `lang` attribute on the `<html>` element that matches the language on the page. In this example, a [reusable layout](/en/core-concepts/layouts/) gets the language from the current route:
```
is this accurate enough?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Each page must have a `lang` attribute on the `<html>` element that matches the language on the page. In this example, a [reusable layout](/en/core-concepts/layouts/) extracts the language from the current route:
```

    ```astro
    ---
    // src/layouts/Base.astro
    
    import { getLangFromUrl } from '../i18n/utils';
    
    const lang = getLangFromUrl(Astro.url);
    ---
    <html lang={lang}>
        <head>
            <meta charset="utf-8" />
            <link rel="icon" type="image/svg+xml" href="/favicon.svg" />
            <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
            <title>Astro</title>
        </head>
        <body>
            <slot />
        </body>
    </html>
    ```

>     Using this base layout will make sure our pages use the correct `lang` attribute automatically.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    You can then use this base layout to ensure that pages use the correct `lang` attribute automatically.
```
